Electrostatics

Electrostatics	is	a	branch	of	physics	that	studies	electric	charges	at	rest.

Since	 classical	 physics,	 it	 has	 been	 known	 that	 some	 materials	 such	 as	 amber	 attract	 lightweight
particles	after	rubbing.	The	Greek	word	for	amber,	ήλεκτρον,	or	electron,	was	the	source	of	the	word
'electricity'.	 Electrostatic	 phenomena	 arise	 from	 the	 forces	 that	 electric	 charges	 exert	 on	 each	 other.
Such	forces	are	described	by	Coulomb's	law.	Even	though	electrostatically	induced	forces	seem	to	be
rather	weak,	some	electrostatic	forces	such	as	the	one	between	an	electron	and	a	proton,	that	together
make	up	a	hydrogen	atom,	is	about	36	orders	of	magnitude	stronger	than	the	gravitational	force	acting
between	them.

Paper	strips	attracted	by	a
charged	CD

There	 are	 many	 examples	 of	 electrostatic	 phenomena,	 from	 those	 as	 simple	 as	 the
attraction	 of	 the	 plastic	 wrap	 to	 one's	 hand	 after	 it	 is	 removed	 from	 a	 package	 to	 the
apparently	 spontaneous	 explosion	 of	 grain	 silos,	 the	 damage	 of	 electronic	 components
during	manufacturing,	and	photocopier	&	laser	printer	operation.	Electrostatics	involves
the	 buildup	 of	 charge	 on	 the	 surface	 of	 objects	 due	 to	 contact	 with	 other	 surfaces.
Although	charge	exchange	happens	whenever	any	two	surfaces	contact	and	separate,	the
effects	of	charge	exchange	are	usually	only	noticed	when	at	least	one	of	the	surfaces	has
a	high	resistance	to	electrical	flow.	This	is	because	the	charges	that	transfer	are	trapped
there	for	a	time	long	enough	for	their	effects	to	be	observed.	These	charges	then	remain
on	 the	 object	 until	 they	 either	 bleed	 off	 to	 ground	 or	 are	 quickly	 neutralized	 by	 a
discharge:	 e.g.,	 the	 familiar	 phenomenon	 of	 a	 static	 'shock'	 is	 caused	 by	 the
neutralization	of	charge	built	up	in	the	body	from	contact	with	insulated	surfaces.

Contents
Coulomb's	law
Electric	field
Gauss'	law
Poisson	and	Laplace	equations

Electrostatic	approximation

Electrostatic	potential
Electrostatic	energy
Electrostatic	pressure

Styrofoam	peanuts	clinging	to	a	cat's	fur	due
to	static	electricity.	The	triboelectric	effect
causes	an	electrostatic	charge	to	build	up	on
the	fur	due	to	the	cat's	motions.	The	electric
field	of	the	charge	causes	polarization	of	the
molecules	of	the	styrofoam	due	to
electrostatic	induction,	resulting	in	a	slight
attraction	of	the	light	plastic	pieces	to	the
charged	fur.	This	is	also	the	cause	of	static
cling	in	clothes.

Triboelectric	series
Electrostatic	generators
Charge	neutralization
Electrostatic	induction
'Static'	electricity

Static	electricity	and	chemical	industry

Applicable	standards

Electrostatic	induction	in	commercial	applications
See	also
References
Further	reading
External	links

Coulomb's	law
Coulomb's	law	states	that:

'The	magnitude	of	the	electrostatic	force	of	attraction	or	repulsion	between	two	point	charges	is	directly	proportional	to	the	product	of	the
magnitudes	of	charges	and	inversely	proportional	to	the	square	of	the	distance	between	them.'

The	force	is	along	the	straight	line	joining	them.	If	the	two	charges	have	the	same	sign,	the	electrostatic	force	between	them	is	repulsive;	if
they	have	different	signs,	the	force	between	them	is	attractive.

If	 	is	the	distance	(in	meters)	between	two	charges,	then	the	force	(in	newtons)	between	two	point	charges	 	and	

	(in	coulombs)	is:

where	ε0	is	the	vacuum	permittivity,	or	permittivity	of	free	space:[1]

The	SI	units	of	ε0	are	equivalently	 A2s4	kg−1m−3	or	C2N−1m−2	or	F	m−1.	Coulomb's	constant	is:

The	use	of	ε0	instead	of	k0	in	expressing	Coulomb's	Law	is	related	to	the	fact	that	the	force	is	inversely	proportional	to	the	surface	area	of	a
sphere	with	radius	equal	to	the	separation	between	the	two	charges.

A	single	proton	has	a	charge	of	e,	and	the	electron	has	a	charge	of	−e,	where,

These	physical	constants	(ε0,	k0,	e)	are	currently	defined	so	that	ε0	and	k0	are	exactly	defined,	and	e	is	a	measured	quantity.
Electric	field
The	 electric	 field,	
,	 in	 units	 of	 newtons	 per	 coulomb	 or	 volts	 per
meter,	is	a	vector	field	that	can	be	defined	everywhere,	except	at	the
location	of	point	charges	(where	it	diverges	to	infinity).[2]	It	is	defined
as	the	electrostatic	force	
	in	newtons	on	a	hypothetical	small	test
charge	at	the	point	due	to	Coulomb's	Law,	divided	by	the	magnitude
of	the	charge	

	in	coulombs

Electric	 field	 lines	 are	 useful	 for	 visualizing	 the	 electric	 field.	 Field
lines	 begin	 on	 positive	 charge	 and	 terminate	 on	 negative	 charge.
They	are	parallel	to	the	direction	of	the	electric	field	at	each	point,
and	the	density	of	these	field	lines	is	a	measure	of	the	magnitude	of
the	electric	field	at	any	given	point.

Consider	a	collection	of	
(called	source	points),	 the	 electric	 field	 at	
is:[2]

	particles	of	charge	

,	located	at	points	

	 (called	 the	field	point)

,	 and	

The	electrostatic	field	(lines	with	arrows)	of	a	nearby	positive
charge	(+)	causes	the	mobile	charges	in	conductive	objects	to
separate	due	to	electrostatic	induction.	Negative	charges	(blue)
are	attracted	and	move	to	the	surface	of	the	object	facing	the
external	charge.	Positive	charges	(red)	are	repelled	and	move	to
the	surface	facing	away.	These	induced	surface	charges	are
exactly	the	right	size	and	shape	so	their	opposing	electric	field
cancels	the	electric	field	of	the	external	charge	throughout	the
interior	of	the	metal.	Therefore,	the	electrostatic	field	everywhere
inside	a	conductive	object	is	zero,	and	the	electrostatic	potential
is	constant.

	is	the	displacement	vector	from	a	source	point	

where	
to	 the	 field	point	
indicates	the	direction	of	the	field.	For	a	single	point	charge	at	the	origin,	the	magnitude	of	this	electric	field	is	
	and	points
away	from	that	charge	is	positive.	The	fact	that	the	force	(and	hence	the	field)	can	be	calculated	by	summing	over	all	the	contributions	due	to
individual	source	particles	is	an	example	of	the	superposition	principle.	The	electric	field	produced	by	a	distribution	of	charges	is	given	by
the	volume	charge	density	

	and	can	be	obtained	by	converting	this	sum	into	a	triple	integral:

	 is	 a	 unit	 vector	 that

Gauss'	law
Gauss'	law	states	that	"the	total	electric	flux	through	any	closed	surface	in	free	space	of	any	shape	drawn	in	an	electric	field	is	proportional
to	the	total	electric	charge	enclosed	by	the	surface."	Mathematically,	Gauss's	law	takes	the	form	of	an	integral	equation:

where	
Divergence	Theorem	allows	Gauss's	Law	to	be	written	in	differential	form:

	is	a	volume	element.	If	the	charge	is	distributed	over	a	surface	or	along	a	line,	replace	

	by	

	or	

.	The

where	

	is	the	divergence	operator.

Poisson	and	Laplace	equations
The	 definition	 of	 electrostatic	 potential,	 combined	 with	 the	 differential	 form	 of	 Gauss's	 law	 (above),	 provides	 a	 relationship	 between	 the
potential	Φ	and	the	charge	density	ρ:

This	relationship	is	a	form	of	Poisson's	equation.	In	the	absence	of	unpaired	electric	charge,	the	equation	becomes	Laplace's	equation:

Electrostatic	approximation
The	validity	of	the	electrostatic	approximation	rests	on	the	assumption	that	the	electric	field	is	irrotational:

From	Faraday's	law,	this	assumption	implies	the	absence	or	near-absence	of	time-varying	magnetic	fields:

In	 other	 words,	 electrostatics	 does	 not	 require	 the	 absence	 of	 magnetic	 fields	 or	 electric	 currents.	 Rather,	 if	 magnetic	 fields	 or	 electric
currents	do	exist,	they	must	not	change	with	time,	or	in	the	worst-case,	they	must	change	with	time	only	very	slowly.	In	some	problems,	both
electrostatics	 and	 magnetostatics	 may	 be	 required	 for	 accurate	 predictions,	 but	 the	 coupling	 between	 the	 two	 can	 still	 be	 ignored.
Electrostatics	and	magnetostatics	can	both	be	seen	as	Galilean	limits	for	electromagnetism.[3]

Electrostatic	potential
Because	 the	 electric	 field	 is	 irrotational,	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 express	 the	 electric	 field	 as	 the	 gradient	 of	 a	 scalar	 function,
electrostatic	potential	(also	known	as	the	voltage).	An	electric	field,	
potential,	expressed	mathematically	as

,	 called	 the
,	points	from	regions	of	high	electric	potential	to	regions	of	low	electric

The	gradient	theorem	can	be	used	to	establish	that	the	electrostatic	potential	is	the	amount	of	work	per	unit	charge	required	to	move	a
charge	from	point	

	to	point	 	with	the	following	line	integral:

From	these	equations,	we	see	that	the	electric	potential	is	constant	in	any	region	for	which	the	electric	field	vanishes	(such	as	occurs	inside	a
conducting	object).

Electrostatic	energy
A	single	test	particle's	potential	energy,	
infinity,	and	assume	a	collection	of	

,	can	be	calculated	from	a	line	integral	of	the	work,	

.	We	integrate	from	a	point	at

	particles	of	charge	

,	are	already	situated	at	the	points	

.	This	potential	energy	(in	Joules)	is:

where	
that	would	be	at	
potential	energy	due	a	collection	of	N	charges	is	calculating	by	assembling	these	particles	one	at	a	time:

	is	the	distance	of	each	charge	
,	and	
	if	the	test	charge	were	not	present.	If	only	two	charges	are	present,	the	potential	energy	is	

	from	the	test	charge	 ,	which	situated	at	the	point	

	is	the	electric	potential
.	The	total	electric

where	the	following	sum	from,	j	=	1	to	N,	excludes	i	=	j:

This	 electric	 potential,	
	 were	 missing.	 This	 formula	 obviously	 excludes	 the	 (infinite)
energy	that	would	be	required	to	assemble	each	point	charge	from	a	disperse	cloud	of	charge.	The	sum	over	charges	can	be	converted	into
an	integral	over	charge	density	using	the	prescription	

	 is	 what	 would	 be	 measured	 at	

	 if	 the	 charge	

:

,

This	second	expression	for	electrostatic	energy	uses	the	fact	that	the	electric	field	is	the	negative	gradient	of	the	electric	potential,	as	well	as
vector	calculus	identities	in	a	way	that	resembles	integration	by	parts.	These	two	integrals	for	electric	field	energy	seem	to	indicate	two

mutually	 exclusive	 formulas	 for	 electrostatic	 energy	 density,	 namely	
energy	only	if	both	are	integrated	over	all	space.

	 and	

;	 they	 yield	 equal	 values	 for	 the	 total	 electrostatic

Electrostatic	pressure
On	a	conductor,	a	surface	charge	will	experience	a	force	in	the	presence	of	an	electric	field.	This	force	is	the	average	of	the	discontinuous
electric	field	at	the	surface	charge.	This	average	in	terms	of	the	field	just	outside	the	surface	amounts	to:

,

This	pressure	tends	to	draw	the	conductor	into	the	field,	regardless	of	the	sign	of	the	surface	charge.
Triboelectric	series
The	triboelectric	effect	is	a	type	of	contact	electrification	in	which	certain	materials	become	electrically	charged	when	they	are	brought	into
contact	 with	 a	 different	 material	 and	 then	 separated.	 One	 of	 the	 materials	 acquires	 a	 positive	 charge,	 and	 the	 other	 acquires	 an	 equal
negative	charge.	The	polarity	and	strength	of	the	charges	produced	differ	according	to	the	materials,	surface	roughness,	temperature,	strain,
and	other	properties.	Amber,	for	example,	can	acquire	an	electric	charge	by	friction	with	a	material	like	wool.	This	property,	first	recorded
by	Thales	of	Miletus,	was	the	first	electrical	phenomenon	investigated	by	humans.	Other	examples	of	materials	that	can	acquire	a	significant
charge	when	rubbed	together	include	glass	rubbed	with	silk,	and	hard	rubber	rubbed	with	fur.
Electrostatic	generators
The	presence	of	surface	charge	imbalance	means	that	the	objects	will	exhibit	attractive	or	repulsive	forces.	This	surface	charge	imbalance,
which	yields	static	electricity,	can	be	generated	by	touching	two	differing	surfaces	together	and	then	separating	them	due	to	the	phenomena
of	contact	electrification	and	the	triboelectric	effect.	Rubbing	two	nonconductive	objects	generates	a	great	amount	of	static	electricity.	This
is	not	just	the	result	of	friction;	two	nonconductive	surfaces	can	become	charged	by	just	being	placed	one	on	top	of	the	other.	Since	most
surfaces	have	a	rough	texture,	it	takes	longer	to	achieve	charging	through	contact	than	through	rubbing.	Rubbing	objects	together	increases
amount	of	adhesive	contact	between	the	two	surfaces.	Usually	insulators,	e.g.,	substances	that	do	not	conduct	electricity,	are	good	at	both
generating,	and	holding,	a	surface	charge.	Some	examples	of	these	substances	are	rubber,	plastic,	glass,	and	pith.	Conductive	objects	only
rarely	generate	charge	imbalance	except,	for	example,	when	a	metal	surface	is	impacted	by	solid	or	liquid	nonconductors.	The	charge	that	is
transferred	during	contact	electrification	is	stored	on	the	surface	of	each	object.	Static	electric	generators,	devices	which	produce	very	high
voltage	at	very	low	current	and	used	for	classroom	physics	demonstrations,	rely	on	this	effect.

Note	that	the	presence	of	electric	current	does	not	detract	from	the	electrostatic	forces	nor	from	the	sparking,	from	the	corona	discharge,	or
other	phenomena.	Both	phenomena	can	exist	simultaneously	in	the	same	system.

See	also:	Friction	machines,	Wimshurst	machines,	and	Van	de	Graaff	generators.

Charge	neutralization

Natural	 electrostatic	 phenomena	 are	 most	 familiar	 as	 an	 occasional	 annoyance	 in	 seasons	 of	 low	 humidity,	 but	 can	 be	 destructive	 and
harmful	in	some	situations	(e.g.	electronics	manufacturing).	When	working	in	direct	contact	with	integrated	circuit	electronics	(especially
delicate	MOSFETs),	or	in	the	presence	of	flammable	gas,	care	must	be	taken	to	avoid	accumulating	and	suddenly	discharging	a	static	charge
(see	electrostatic	discharge).
Electrostatic	induction
Electrostatic	 induction,	 discovered	 by	 British	 scientist	 John	 Canton	 in	 1753	 and	 Swedish	 professor	 Johan	 Carl	 Wilcke	 in	 1762[4][5][6]	 is	 a
redistribution	of	charges	in	an	object	caused	by	the	electric	field	of	a	nearby	charge.	For	example,	if	a	positively	charged	object	is	brought
near	an	uncharged	metal	object,	the	mobile	negatively-charged	electrons	in	the	metal	will	be	attracted	the	external	charge,	and	move	to	the
side	of	the	metal	facing	it,	creating	a	negative	charge	on	the	surface.	When	the	electrons	move	out	of	an	area	they	leave	a	positive	charge
due	to	the	metal	atoms'	nuclei,	so	the	side	of	the	metal	object	facing	away	from	the	charge	acquires	a	positive	charge.	These	induced	charges
disappear	 when	 the	 external	 charge	 is	 removed.	 Induction	 is	 also	 responsible	 for	 the	 attraction	 of	 light	 objects,	 such	 as	 balloons,	 paper
scraps	and	styrofoam	packing	peanuts	to	static	charges.	The	surface	charges	induced	in	conductive	objects	exactly	cancel	external	electric
fields	 inside	 the	 conductor,	 so	 there	 is	 no	 electric	 field	 inside	 a	 metal	 object.	 This	 is	 the	 basis	 for	 the	 electric	 field	 shielding	 action	 of	 a
Faraday	 cage.	 Since	 the	 electric	 field	 is	 the	 gradient	 of	 the	 voltage,	 electrostatic	 induction	 is	 also	 responsible	 for	 making	 the	 electric
potential	(voltage)	constant	throughout	a	conductive	object.
'Static'	electricity
Before	the	year	1832,	when	Michael	Faraday	published	the	results	of	his	experiment	on	the	identity	of
electricities,	 physicists	 thought	 "static	 electricity"	 was	 somehow	 different	 from	 other	 electrical
charges.	 Michael	 Faraday	 proved	 that	 the	 electricity	 induced	 from	 the	 magnet,	 voltaic	 electricity
produced	by	a	battery,	and	static	electricity	are	all	the	same.

Static	electricity	is	usually	caused	when	certain	materials	are	rubbed	against	each	other,	like	wool	on
plastic	or	the	soles	of	shoes	on	carpet.	The	process	causes	electrons	to	be	pulled	from	the	surface	of
one	material	and	relocated	on	the	surface	of	the	other	material.

A	 static	 shock	 occurs	 when	 the	 surface	 of	 the	 second	 material,	 negatively	 charged	 with	 electrons,
touches	a	positively	charged	conductor,	or	vice	versa.

Static	 electricity	 is	 commonly	 used	 in	 xerography,	 air	 filters,	 and	 some	 automotive	 paints.	 Static
electricity	is	a	buildup	of	electric	charges	on	two	objects	that	have	become	separated	from	each	other.
Small	electrical	components	can	easily	be	damaged	by	static	electricity.	Component	manufacturers	use
a	number	of	antistatic	devices	to	avoid	this.

Static	electricity	and	chemical	industry
When	different	materials	are	brought	together	and	then	separated,	an	accumulation	of	electric	charge
can	occur	which	leaves	one	material	positively	charged	while	the	other	becomes	negatively	charged.
The	 mild	 shock	 that	 you	 receive	 when	 touching	 a	 grounded	 object	 after	 walking	 on	 carpet	 is	 an
example	of	excess	electrical	charge	accumulating	in	your	body	from	frictional	charging	between	your	shoes	and	the	carpet.	The	resulting
charge	build-up	upon	your	body	can	generate	a	strong	electrical	discharge.	Although	experimenting	with	static	electricity	may	be	fun,	similar
sparks	 create	 severe	 hazards	 in	 those	 industries	 dealing	 with	 flammable	 substances,	 where	 a	 small	 electrical	 spark	 may	 ignite	 explosive
mixtures	with	devastating	consequences.

Lightning	over	Oradea	in
Romania

A	similar	charging	mechanism	can	occur	within	low	conductivity	fluids	flowing	through	pipelines—a	process	called	flow	electrification.	Fluids
which	 have	 low	 electrical	 conductivity	 (below	 50	 picosiemens	 per	 meter),	 are	 called	 accumulators.	 Fluids	 having	 conductivities	 above	 50
pS/m	 are	 called	 non-accumulators.	 In	 non-accumulators,	 charges	 recombine	 as	 fast	 as	 they	 are	 separated	 and	 hence	 electrostatic	 charge
generation	 is	 not	 significant.	 In	 the	 petrochemical	 industry,	 50	 pS/m	 is	 the	 recommended	 minimum	 value	 of	 electrical	 conductivity	 for
adequate	removal	of	charge	from	a	fluid.

An	important	concept	for	insulating	fluids	is	the	static	relaxation	time.	This	is	similar	to	the	time	constant	(tau)	within	an	RC	circuit.	For
insulating	materials,	it	is	the	ratio	of	the	static	dielectric	constant	divided	by	the	electrical	conductivity	of	the	material.	For	hydrocarbon
fluids,	this	is	sometimes	approximated	by	dividing	the	number	18	by	the	electrical	conductivity	of	the	fluid.	Thus	a	fluid	that	has	an	electrical
conductivity	 of	 1	 pS/cm	 (100	 pS/m)	 will	 have	 an	 estimated	 relaxation	 time	 of	 about	 18	 seconds.	 The	 excess	 charge	 within	 a	 fluid	 will	 be
almost	completely	dissipated	after	4	to	5	times	the	relaxation	time,	or	90	seconds	for	the	fluid	in	the	above	example.

Charge	generation	increases	at	higher	fluid	velocities	and	larger	pipe	diameters,	becoming	quite	significant	in	pipes	8	inches	(200	mm)	or
larger.	Static	charge	generation	in	these	systems	is	best	controlled	by	limiting	fluid	velocity.	The	British	standard	BS	PD	CLC/TR	50404:2003
(formerly	BS-5958-Part	2)	Code	of	Practice	for	Control	of	Undesirable	Static	Electricity	prescribes	velocity	limits.	Because	of	its	large	impact
on	dielectric	constant,	the	recommended	velocity	for	hydrocarbon	fluids	containing	water	should	be	limited	to	1	m/s.

Bonding	and	earthing	are	the	usual	ways	by	which	charge	buildup	can	be	prevented.	For	fluids	with	electrical	conductivity	below	10	pS/m,
bonding	and	earthing	are	not	adequate	for	charge	dissipation,	and	anti-static	additives	may	be	required.

Applicable	standards
1.BS	PD	CLC/TR	50404:2003	Code	of	Practice	for	Control	of	Undesirable	Static	Electricity

2.NFPA	77	(2007)	Recommended	Practice	on	Static	Electricity

3.API	RP	2003	(1998)	Protection	Against	Ignitions	Arising	Out	of	Static,	Lightning,	and	Stray	Currents
Electrostatic	induction	in	commercial	applications
Electrostatic	 induction	 was	 used	 in	 the	 past	 to	 build	 high-voltage	 generators	 known	 as	 Influence	 machines.	 The	 main	 component	 that
emerged	 in	 these	 times	 is	 the	 capacitor.	 Electrostatic	 induction	 is	 also	 used	 for	 electro-mechanic	 precipitation	 or	 projection.In	 such
technologies,	 charged	 particles	 of	 small	 sizes	 are	 collected	 or	 deposited	 intentionally	 on	 surfaces.	 Applications	 range	 from	 Electrostatic
precipitator	 to	 Spray	 painting	 or	 Inkjet	 printing.	 Recently	 a	 new	 Wireless	 power	 Transfer	 Technology	 has	 been	 based	 on	 electrostatic
induction	between	oscillating	distant	dipoles.
See	also

Electromagnetism
Permittivity	and	relative	permittivity
Ionic	bond
Electronegativity
Electrostatic	discharge
Electrostatic	separator
Electrostatic	voltmeter
Quantisation	Of	Charge

References

Faraday,	Michael	(1839).	Experimental	Researches	in	Electricity.	London:	Royal	Inst.
e-book	at	Project	Gutenberg
Halliday,	David;	Robert	Resnick;	Kenneth	S.	Krane	(1992).	Physics.	New	York:	John	Wiley	&	Sons.	ISBN	0-471-80457-6.
Griffiths,	David	J.	(1999).	Introduction	to	Electrodynamics.	Upper	Saddle	River,	NJ:	Prentice	Hall.	ISBN	0-13-805326-X.
Hermann	A.	Haus;	James	R.	Melcher	(1989).	Electromagnetic	Fields	and	Energy.	Englewood	Cliffs,	NJ:	Prentice-Hall.	ISBN	0-13-249020-X.

1.	 Matthew	Sadiku	(2009).	Elements	of	electromagnetics.	p.	104.	ISBN	9780195387759.
2.	 Purcell,	Edward	M.	(2013).	Electricity	and	Magnetism	(https://books.google.com/books?id=A2rS5vlSFq0C&pg=PA16&dq=%22electric+field

%22).	Cambridge	University	Press.	pp.	16–18.	ISBN	1107014026.

3.	 Heras,	J.	A.	(2010).	"The	Galilean	limits	of	Maxwell's	equations".	American	Journal	of	Physics.	78	(10):	1048.	arXiv:1012.1068	(https://arxiv.
.	Bibcode:2010AmJPh..78.1048H	(http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010AmJPh..78.1048H).	doi:10.1119/1.3442798	(http

org/abs/1012.1068) 
s://doi.org/10.1119%2F1.3442798).

4.	 "Electricity"	(https://books.google.com/books?id=Mz4EAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA181).	Encyclopaedia	Britannica,	11th	Ed.	9.	The	Encyclopaedia

Britannica	Co.	1910.	p.	181.	Retrieved	2008-06-23.

5.	 Heilbron,	J.	L.	(1979).	Electricity	in	the	17th	and	18th	Centuries:	A	Study	of	Early	Modern	Physics	(https://books.google.com/books?id=UlTL

RUn1sy8C&pg=PA387).	Univ.	of	California	Press.	ISBN	0520034783.

6.	 Sarkar,	T.	K.;	Mailloux,	Robert;	Oliner,	Arthur	A.,	Ed.	(2006).	History	of	Wireless	(https://books.google.com/books?id=NBLEAA6QKYkC&pg=P

A9&dq=%22Electrostatic+induction%22+wilcke+canton).	John	Wiley	and	Sons.	p.	9.	ISBN	0471783013.

Further	reading
Essays

William	J.	Beaty,	"Humans	and	sparks;	The	Cause,	Stopping	the	Pain,	and	'Electric	People	(http://amasci.com/emotor/zapped.html)".	1997.

Books

William	Cecil	Dampier,	"The	theory	of	experimental	electricity".	Cambridge	[Eng.]	University	press,	1905	(Cambridge	physical	series).	xi,
334	p.	illus.,	diagrs.	23	cm.	LCCN	05040419	//r33
William	Thomson	Kelvin,	Reprint	of	Papers	on	Electrostatics	and	Magnetism	By	William	Thomson	Kelvin	(https://books.google.com/books?id
=Y_QEAAAAYAAJ),	Macmillan	1872
Alexander	MacAulay	Utility	of	Quaternions	in	Physics.	Electrostatics—General	Problem	(https://books.google.com/books?id=EAI5AAAAMAAJ
&pg=PA55).	Macmillan	1893
Alexander	Russell,	A	Treatise	on	the	Theory	of	Alternating	Currents.	Electrostatics	(https://books.google.com/books?id=fJQ3AAAAMAAJ&pg
=PA2).	University	Press	1904

External	links

Man's	static	jacket	sparks	alert	(http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/4252692.stm)".	BBC	News,	16	September	2005.
Static	Electricity	and	Plastics	(https://web.archive.org/web/20081217035930/http://www.zeusinc.com/pdf/Zeus_Static.pdf)

"Can	shocks	from	static	electricity	damage	your	health?	(http://wolfsonelectrostatics.com/news/news-item12.asp)".	Wolfson	Electrostatics
News	pages.
Invisible	wall	of	static:	(http://amasci.com/weird/unusual/e-wall.html)
Downloadable	electrostatic	BEM	modules	in	MATLAB	for	simple	capacitance	problems	(https://web.archive.org/web/20160304033545/http:/
/www.nevaelectromagnetics.com/ElectrostaticsModeling.html)
Introduction	to	Electrostatics:	Point	charges	can	be	treated	as	a	distribution	using	the	Dirac	delta	function	(http://physics.gmu.edu/~joe/PH
YS685/Topic1.pdf)
	Learning	materials	related	to	Electrostatics	at	Wikiversity

Retrieved	from	"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Electrostatics&oldid=848211837"

This	page	was	last	edited	on	30	June	2018,	at	13:30	(UTC).
Text	is	available	under	the	Creative	Commons	Attribution-ShareAlike	License;	additional	terms	may	apply.	By	using	this	site,	you	agree	to	the
Terms	of	Use	and	Privacy	Policy.	Wikipedia®	is	a	registered	trademark	of	the	Wikimedia	Foundation,	Inc.,	a	non-profit	organization.

